feat: how to use custom Otel collector. (#476)
kubewarden/docs: docs/howtos/telemetry/40-custom-otel-collector.md

        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: []
          exporters: [debug, prometheus]
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: []
          exporters: [debug, otlp/jaeger]
```

Now apply the manifest:

```console
kubectl apply -f otel-collector.yaml
```

Note that the Otel collector has configured the certificates to establish
secure communication between the collector and the Kubewarden stack and the
certificate authority(CA) to validate the client certificate. Which. in this
case, is the Kubewarden stack certificate. If you do not want to use secure
communication with mTLS or TLS, you can remove the `cert_file`, `key_file` and
`client_ca_file` keys from the `otlp` receiver configuration as well as the
mount volumes and volume mounts with the certificates data.

Furthermore, You can modify the OpenTelemetry Collector configuration depending
on your needs. In this example, we are using a simple configuration to receive
trace events and metrics and forward them to Prometheus and Jaeger.

## Install Kubewarden stack

> When the OpenTelemetry Collector is up and running, we can deploy Kubewarden in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once the OpenTelemetry Collector is up and running, we can deploy Kubewarden in
```

  namespace: jaeger
spec:
  ingress:
    enabled: true
    annotations:
      kubernetes.io/ingress.class: nginx
EOF

helm repo add prometheus-community https://prometheus-community.github.io/helm-charts
helm install --wait --create-namespace \
  --namespace prometheus \
  --version 51.5.3 \
  --values kube-prometheus-stack-values.yaml \
  prometheus prometheus-community/kube-prometheus-stack

kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
apiVersion: monitoring.coreos.com/v1
kind: ServiceMonitor
metadata:
  name: my-otel-collector
  namespace: kubewarden
spec:
  endpoints:
    - interval: 10s
      port: "8080"
  namespaceSelector:
    matchNames:
      - kubewarden
  selector:
    matchLabels:
      app.kubernetes.io/name: my-collector-collector
EOF

```

## Install OpenTelemetry Collector

Now, we will use a custom OpenTelemetry Collector configuration to
receive and forward trace events and metrics. For that a secure communication
between the OpenTelemetry Collector and the Kubewarden stack will be required. In
this example, we will setup a mTLS communication. Therefore, it's necessary to create a
self-signed certificate for the OpenTelemetry Collector and Kubewarden stack.

:::note

> The following manifest creates all the resources in the same namespace where
> the Kubewarden stack will be install later in this documentation. Therefore, if
> necessary, you need to create the namespace `kubewarden` before applying the
> manifest.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following manifest creates all the resources in the same namespace where
the Kubewarden stack is to be installed later, in this documentation. 
So, if necessary, you need to create the namespace `kubewarden` before applying the manifest.
```

    - name: client-certificate
      secret:
        secretName: my-client-cert
  volumeMounts:
    - name: server-certificate
      mountPath: /tmp/etc/ssl/certs/my-server-cert
      readOnly: true
    - name: client-certificate
      mountPath: /tmp/etc/ssl/certs/my-client-cert
      readOnly: true
  config:
    receivers:
      otlp:
        protocols:
          grpc:
            tls:
              cert_file: /tmp/etc/ssl/certs/my-server-cert/tls.crt
              key_file: /tmp/etc/ssl/certs/my-server-cert/tls.key
              client_ca_file: /tmp/etc/ssl/certs/my-client-cert/ca.crt
    processors: {}
    exporters:
      debug:
        verbosity: normal
      prometheus:
        endpoint: ":8080"
      otlp/jaeger:
        endpoint: "my-open-telemetry-collector.jaeger.svc.cluster.local:4317"
        tls:
          insecure: true
    service:
      pipelines:
        metrics:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: []
          exporters: [debug, prometheus]
        traces:
          receivers: [otlp]
          processors: []
          exporters: [debug, otlp/jaeger]
```

Now apply the manifest:

```console
kubectl apply -f my-collector.yaml
```

> Note that the Otel collector has configured the certificates to establish a
> secure communication between the collector and the Kubewarden stack. And the
> certificate authority(CA) to validate the client certificate. In this case, the
> Kubewarden stack certificate. If you do not want to use a mTLS communication,
> you can remove the `client_ca_file` key from the `otlp` receiver configuration
> and well as the mount with the client CA.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that the Otel collector has configured the certificates to establish
secure communication between the collector and the Kubewarden stack and the certificate authority(CA) to validate the client certificate. Which. in this case, is the Kubewarden stack certificate. 
If you do not want to use a mTLS communication,
you can remove the `client_ca_file` key from the `otlp` receiver configuration
as well as from the mount with the client CA.
```

> It's important to remember that the OpenTelemetry Collector configuration can
> vary depending on your needs. In this example, we are using a simple
> configuration to receive trace events and metrics and forward them to
> Prometheus and Jaeger. Feel free to customize the configuration.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can modify the OpenTelemetry Collector configuration depending on your needs. In this example, we are using a simple
configuration to receive trace events and metrics and forward them to
Prometheus and Jaeger.
```

## Install Kubewarden stack

> Now that the OpenTelemetry Collector is up and running, we can proceed to the
> deployment of Kubewarden in the usual way. To allow Kubewarden to send trace
> events and metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector, we need to configure the
> Kubewarden components using the following values:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the OpenTelemetry Collector is up and running, we can deploy Kubewarden in the usual way. You need to configure the Kubewarden components so they send events and metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector.
```

```yaml
# values.yaml
telemetry:
  mode: custom
  metrics: True
  tracing: True
  custom:
    endpoint: "http://my-collector-collector.kubewarden.svc:4317"
    insecure: false
    otelCollectorCertificateSecret: "my-server-cert"
    otelCollectorClientCertificateSecret: "my-client-cert"
```

> Regarding to the secret storing the certificate, some keys are required to
> configure the certificates used to establish a secure communication between the
> Kubewarden stack and the OpenTelemetry Collector. The
> `otelCollectorCertificateSecret` secret requires the `ca.crt` key. This is the
> certificate used to verify the Otel collector certificate. The
> `otelCollectorClientCertificateSecret` secret requires the `tls.crt` and
> `tls.key` keys. These are the client certificate used to authenticate the
> Kubewarden stack to the Otel collector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Keys are required to
configure the certificates used to establish secure communication between the Kubewarden stack and the OpenTelemetry Collector. 
The `otelCollectorCertificateSecret` secret requires the `ca.crt` key. 
This certificate is used to verify the Otel collector certificate. 
The `otelCollectorClientCertificateSecret` secret requires the `tls.crt` and
`tls.key` keys. These are the client certificates used to authenticate the
Kubewarden stack to the Otel collector.
```

Install the Kubewarden stack:

```
helm install --wait \
  --namespace kubewarden --create-namespace \
  kubewarden-crds kubewarden/kubewarden-crds

helm install --wait \
  --namespace kubewarden \
  --create-namespace \
  --values values.yaml \
  kubewarden-controller kubewarden/kubewarden-controller

helm install --wait \
  --namespace kubewarden \
  --create-namespace \
  kubewarden-defaults kubewarden/kubewarden-defaults \
  --set recommendedPolicies.enabled=True \
  --set recommendedPolicies.defaultPolicyMode=monitor
```

Now you have a custom OpenTelemetry Collector running in your cluster and

> Kubewarden sending trace events and metrics to it. Let's see how to visualize
> the metrics and trace

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Kubewarden sending trace events and metrics to it.
```

## Exploring the Jaeger UI

> We can see the trace events have been sent by the PolicyServer instance to
> Jaeger via the Otel collector, as there is a new service
> `kubewarden-policy-server` listed in the UI:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can see the trace events have been sent by the PolicyServer instance to
Jaeger via the Otel collector, as there is a new service
`kubewarden-policy-server` listed in the UI:
```

![Jaeger dashboard](/img/jaeger-ui-home.png "The dashboard of Jaeger")

> The Jaeger collector is properly receiving the traces generated by the custom
> Otel collector.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Jaeger collector is receiving the traces generated by the custom
Otel collector.
```

To access the Jaeger UI, you can create an ingress or use `kubectl -n jaeger
port-forward service/my-open-telemetry-query 16686` then go to
[localhost:16686](localhost:16686).

## Accessing Prometheus

> Prometheus exposes a very simple UI that we can use to inspect metrics exposed
> by different components within our Kubernetes cluster.
> 
> We can forward the Prometheus port so we can easily access it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Prometheus exposes a UI that you can use to inspect metrics exposed
by different components in your Kubernetes cluster.

You can forward the Prometheus port so you can access it.
```

that has been previously deployed on the cluster.

We will deploy only one instance of the [OpenTelemetry Collector](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/collector/)
inside of the cluster.

## Install dependencies

First, we begin by installing the dependencies of OpenTelemetry Collector.

We want the communication between the Kubewarden components and the collector to be encrypted.
Hence we will leverage [cert-manager](https://cert-manager.io/) to manage all the certificates
required to secure the communication.

The traces collected by the OpenTelemetry Collector will be sent to a [Jaeger](https://www.jaegertracing.io/)
instance.

The Kubewarden stack will send metrics to the OpenTelemetry Collector. This one will expose the metrics
as a Prometheus endpoint. The metrics will then be scraped by a Prometheus instance and stored in its
database. The same Prometheus instance will also expose a UI to interact with the metrics.

Some of the resources we will create are going to be defined inside of the `kubewarden`
Namespace, or expect its existence. Because of that, we begin by creating the Namespace:

```console
kubectl create namespace kubewarden
```

> ### Install cert-manager
> 
> cert-manager can be installed in this way:

Author: ```suggestion
### Install cert-manager and OpenTelemetry

cert-manager and OpenTelemetry operator can be installed in this way:
```

helm repo add jetstack https://charts.jetstack.io
helm install --wait \
    --namespace cert-manager \
    --create-namespace \
    --set crds.enabled=true \
    --version 1.15.1 \
    cert-manager jetstack/cert-manager

helm repo add open-telemetry https://open-telemetry.github.io/opentelemetry-helm-charts
helm install --wait \
  --namespace open-telemetry \
  --create-namespace \
  --version 0.65.0 \
  --set "manager.collectorImage.repository=otel/opentelemetry-collector-contrib" \
  my-opentelemetry-operator open-telemetry/opentelemetry-operator
``` 

The communication between the Kubewarden components and the OpenTelemetry Collector will be
established using mTLS.

To do that, we need to create the whole PKI infrastructure:

```yaml
# pki.yaml file
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Certificate
metadata:
  name: my-client-certificate
  namespace: kubewarden
spec:
  dnsNames:
  - kubewarden.kubewarden.svc
  - kubewarden.kubewarden.svc.cluster.local
  issuerRef:
    kind: Issuer
    name: my-client-selfsigned-issuer
  secretName: my-client-cert
---
apiVersion: cert-manager.io/v1
kind: Issuer
metadata:
  name: my-client-selfsigned-issuer
  namespace: kubewarden
spec:

>   selfSigned: {}

Reviewer 3: @jvanz I was wondering if we actually need to create two different issuers. If I'm not mistaken, the issuer leads to the generation of a self-signed CA. If that's true, the same CA could be used to issue the certificates of everything

Reviewer: While possible, I'm ok with having 2 CA authorities in the shape of 2 Issuers, it signifies that the actors on the Kubewarden side and on the OTLP may be separate teams.

Author: As far as I know, it's possible to use the same CA. I've used two different ones just to demonstrate that they are two separated entities and to ensure that the Otel configuration was working as expected during my tests ( I've tested changing the CA in the collector configuration to ensure it was right )

Reviewer: Thinking about it, it may be good to change the name of the Issuers to something that showcases that easier.
